Before, however, entering into particulars respecting the question of
this unity of the Homeric poems, (at least of the Iliad,) I must
express my sympathy with the sentiments expressed in the following
remarks:—

“We cannot but think the universal admiration of its unity by the
better, the poetic age of Greece, almost conclusive testimony to its
original composition. It was not till the age of the grammarians that
its primitive integrity was called in question; nor is it injustice to
assert, that the minute and analytical spirit of a grammarian is not
the best qualification for the profound feeling, the comprehensive
conception of an harmonious whole. The most exquisite anatomist may be
no judge of the symmetry of the human frame: and we would take the
opinion of Chantrey or Westmacott on the proportions and general beauty
of a form, rather than that of Mr. Brodie or Sir Astley Cooper.

“There is some truth, though some malicious exaggeration, in the lines
of Pope.—

“‘The critic eye—that microscope of wit
Sees hairs and pores, examines bit by bit,
How parts relate to parts, or they to whole,
The body’s harmony, the beaming soul,
Are things which Kuster, Burmann, Wasse, shall see,
When man’s whole frame is obvious to a flea.’”[19]


Long was the time which elapsed before any one dreamt of questioning
the unity of the authorship of the Homeric poems. The grave and
cautious Thucydides quoted without hesitation the Hymn to Apollo,[20]
the authenticity of which has been already disclaimed by modern
critics. Longinus, in an oft quoted passage, merely expressed an
opinion touching the comparative inferiority of the Odyssey to the
Iliad,[21] and, among a mass of ancient authors, whose very names[22]
it would be tedious to detail, no suspicion of the personal
non-existence of Homer ever arose. So far, the voice of antiquity seems
to be in favour of our early ideas on the subject; let us now see what
are the discoveries to which more modern investigations lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on
the subject, and we find Bentley remarking that “Homer wrote a sequel
of songs and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and
good cheer, at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs
were not collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about
Peisistratus’ time, about five hundred years after.”[23]

Two French writers—Hedelin and Perrault—avowed a similar scepticism on
the subject; but it is in the “Scienza Nuova” of Battista Vico, that we
first meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf
with so much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian
theory that we have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold
hypothesis, which we will detail in the words of Grote:—[24]

“Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of
the Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by
no means the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously
announced by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent
portions of the Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into
any compact body and unchangeable order, until the days of
Peisistratus, in the sixth century before Christ. As a step towards
that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no written copies of either poem
could be shown to have existed during the earlier times, to which their
composition is referred; and that without writing, neither the perfect
symmetry of so complicated a work could have been originally conceived
by any poet, nor, if realized by him, transmitted with assurance to
posterity. The absence of easy and convenient writing, such as must be
indispensably supposed for long manuscripts, among the early Greeks,
was thus one of the points in Wolf’s case against the primitive
integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey. By Nitzsch, and other leading
opponents of Wolf, the connection of the one with the other seems to
have been accepted as he originally put it; and it has been considered
incumbent on those who defended the ancient aggregate character of the
Iliad and Odyssey, to maintain that they were written poems from the
beginning.

“To me it appears, that the architectonic functions ascribed by Wolf to
Peisistratus and his associates, in reference to the Homeric poems, are
nowise admissible. But much would undoubtedly be gained towards that
view of the question, if it could be shown, that, in order to
controvert it, we were driven to the necessity of admitting long
written poems, in the ninth century before the Christian æra. Few
things, in my opinion, can be more improbable; and Mr. Payne Knight,
opposed as he is to the Wolfian hypothesis, admits this no less than
Wolf himself. The traces of writing in Greece, even in the seventh
century before the Christian æra, are exceedingly trifling. We have no
remaining inscription earlier than the fortieth Olympiad, and the early
inscriptions are rude and unskilfully executed; nor can we even assure
ourselves whether Archilochus, Simonidês of Amorgus, Kallinus,
Tyrtæus, Xanthus, and the other early elegiac and lyric poets,
committed their compositions to writing, or at what time the practice
of doing so became familiar. The first positive ground which authorizes
us to presume the existence of a manuscript of Homer, is in the famous
ordinance of Solôn, with regard to the rhapsodies at the Panathenæa:
but for what length of time previously manuscripts had existed, we are
unable to say.

“Those who maintain the Homeric poems to have been written from the
beginning, rest their case, not upon positive proofs, nor yet upon the
existing habits of society with regard to poetry—for they admit
generally that the Iliad and Odyssey were not read, but recited and
heard,—but upon the supposed necessity that there must have been
manuscripts to ensure the preservation of the poems—the unassisted
memory of reciters being neither sufficient nor trustworthy. But here
we only escape a smaller difficulty by running into a greater; for the
existence of trained bards, gifted with extraordinary memory,[25] is
far less astonishing than that of long manuscripts, in an age
essentially non-reading and non-writing, and when even suitable
instruments and materials for the process are not obvious. Moreover,
there is a strong positive reason for believing that the bard was under
no necessity of refreshing his memory by consulting a manuscript; for
if such had been the fact, blindness would have been a disqualification
for the profession, which we know that it was not, as well from the
example of Demodokus, in the Odyssey, as from that of the blind bard of
Chios, in the Hymn to the Delian Apollo, whom Thucydides, as well as
the general tenor of Grecian legend, identifies with Homer himself. The
author of that hymn, be he who he may, could never have described a
blind man as attaining the utmost perfection in his art, if he had been
conscious that the memory of the bard was only maintained by constant
reference to the manuscript in his chest.”

The loss of the digamma, that _crux_ of critics, that quicksand upon
which even the acumen of Bentley was shipwrecked, seems to prove beyond
a doubt, that the pronunciation of the Greek language had undergone a
considerable change. Now it is certainly difficult to suppose that the
Homeric poems could have suffered by this change, had written copies
been preserved. If Chaucer’s poetry, for instance, had not been
written, it could only have come down to us in a softened form, more
like the effeminate version of Dryden, than the rough, quaint, noble
original.

“At what period,” continues Grote, “these poems, or indeed any other
Greek poems, first began to be written, must be matter of conjecture,
though there is ground for assurance that it was before the time of
Solôn. If, in the absence of evidence, we may venture upon naming any
more determinate period, the question at once suggests itself, What
were the purposes which, in that state of society, a manuscript at its
first commencement must have been intended to answer? For whom was a
written Iliad necessary? Not for the rhapsodes; for with them it was
not only planted in the memory, but also interwoven with the feelings,
and conceived in conjunction with all those flexions and intonations of
voice, pauses, and other oral artifices which were required for
emphatic delivery, and which the naked manuscript could never
reproduce. Not for the general public—they were accustomed to receive
it with its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a solemn
and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad would
be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class of
readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed.
If we could discover at what time such a class first began to be
formed, we should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic
poems were first committed to writing. Now the period which may with
the greatest probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the
formation even of the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle
of the seventh century before the Christian æra (B.C. 660 to B.C.
630), the age of Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonidês of
Amorgus, &c. I ground this supposition on the change then operated in
the character and tendencies of Grecian poetry and music—the elegiac
and the iambic measures having been introduced as rivals to the
primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions having been transferred
from the epical past to the affairs of present and real life. Such a
change was important at a time when poetry was the only known mode of
publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable, yet the
nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking at
the old epical treasures of the people as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric
rhapsodies, just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and
eulogized the Thebaïs as the production of Homer. There seems,
therefore, ground for conjecturing that (for the use of this
newly-formed and important, but very narrow class), manuscripts of the
Homeric poems and other old epics,—the Thebaïs and the Cypria, as well
as the Iliad and the Odyssey,—began to be compiled towards the middle
of the seventh century (B.C. 1); and the opening of Egypt to Grecian
commerce, which took place about the same period, would furnish
increased facilities for obtaining the requisite papyrus to write upon.
A reading class, when once formed, would doubtless slowly increase, and
the number of manuscripts along with it; so that before the time of
Solôn, fifty years afterwards, both readers and manuscripts, though
still comparatively few, might have attained a certain recognized
authority, and formed a tribunal of reference against the carelessness
of individual rhapsodes.”[26]

But even Peisistratus has not been suffered to remain in possession of
the credit, and we cannot help feeling the force of the following
observations—

“There are several incidental circumstances which, in our opinion,
throw some suspicion over the whole history of the Peisistratid
compilation, at least over the theory, that the Iliad was cast into its
present stately and harmonious form by the directions of the Athenian
ruler. If the great poets, who flourished at the bright period of
Grecian song, of which, alas! we have inherited little more than the
fame, and the faint echo, if Stesichorus, Anacreon, and Simonidês were
employed in the noble task of compiling the Iliad and Odyssey, so much
must have been done to arrange, to connect, to harmonize, that it is
almost incredible, that stronger marks of Athenian manufacture should
not remain. Whatever occasional anomalies may be detected, anomalies
which no doubt arise out of our own ignorance of the language of the
Homeric age, however the irregular use of the digamma may have
perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among the
heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in reducing the
Homeric language to its primitive form; however, finally, the Attic
dialect may not have assumed all its more marked and distinguishing
characteristics—still it is difficult to suppose that the language,
particularly in the joinings and transitions, and connecting parts,
should not more clearly betray the incongruity between the more ancient
and modern forms of expression. It is not quite in character with such
a period to imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an
imperfect poem in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott
has done in his continuation of Sir Tristram.

“If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of Athenian
compilation are discoverable in the language of the poems, the total
absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps no less worthy of
observation. In later, and it may fairly be suspected in earlier times,
the Athenians were more than ordinarily jealous of the fame of their
ancestors. But, amid all the traditions of the glories of early Greece
embodied in the Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and
insignificant part. Even the few passages which relate to their
ancestors, Mr. Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible,
indeed, that in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic
fact, that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadæ, the chieftain
of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his forces, may have
been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian sovereign; the
preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the Trojan war may thus have
forced the national feeling of the Athenians to yield to their taste.
The songs which spoke of their own great ancestor were, no doubt, of
far inferior sublimity and popularity, or, at first sight, a Theseid
would have been much more likely to have emanated from an Athenian
synod of compilers of ancient song, than an Achilleid or an Olysseid.
Could France have given birth to a Tasso, Tancred would have been the
hero of the Jerusalem. If, however, the Homeric ballads, as they are
sometimes called, which related the wrath of Achilles, with all its
direful consequences, were so far superior to the rest of the poetic
cycle, as to admit no rivalry,—it is still surprising, that throughout
the whole poem the callida junctura should never betray the workmanship
of an Athenian hand, and that the national spirit of a race, who have
at a later period not inaptly been compared to our self admiring
neighbours, the French, should submit with lofty self denial to the
almost total exclusion of their own ancestors—or, at least, to the
questionable dignity of only having produced a leader tolerably skilled
in the military tactics of his age.”[27]

To return to the Wolfian theory. While it is to be confessed, that
Wolf’s objections to the primitive integrity of the Iliad and Odyssey
have never been wholly got over, we cannot help discovering that they
have failed to enlighten us as to any substantial point, and that the
difficulties with which the whole subject is beset, are rather
augmented than otherwise, if we admit his hypothesis. Nor is
Lachmann’s[28] modification of his theory any better. He divides the
first twenty-two books of the Iliad into sixteen different songs, and
treats as ridiculous the belief that their amalgamation into one
regular poem belongs to a period earlier than the age of Peisistratus.
This, as Grote observes, “explains the gaps and contradictions in the
narrative, but it explains nothing else.” Moreover, we find no
contradictions warranting this belief, and the so-called sixteen poets
concur in getting rid of the following leading men in the first battle
after the secession of Achilles: Elphenor, chief of the Eubœans;
Tlepolemus, of the Rhodians; Pandarus, of the Lycians; Odius, of the
Halizonians; Pirous and Acamas, of the Thracians. None of these heroes
again make their appearance, and we can but agree with Colonel Mure,
that “it seems strange that any number of independent poets should have
so harmoniously dispensed with the services of all six in the sequel.”
The discrepancy, by which Pylæmenes, who is represented as dead in the
fifth book, weeps at his son’s funeral in the thirteenth, can only be
regarded as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann’s modifications with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success,
that the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems,
or, supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by
Peisistratus, and not before his time, are essentially distinct. In
short, “a man may believe the Iliad to have been put together out of
pre-existing songs, without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the
period of its first compilation.” The friends or literary _employês_ of
Peisistratus must have found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the
silence of the Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic
“recension,” goes far to prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts
they examined, this was either wanting, or thought unworthy of
attention.

“Moreover,” he continues, “the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad
or Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age
of Peisistratus—nothing which brings to our view the alterations
brought about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined
money, the habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican
governments, the close military array, the improved construction of
ships, the Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of
religious festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c.,
familiar to the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the
other literary friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to
notice, even without design, had they then, for the first time,
undertaken the task of piecing together many self existent epics into
one large aggregate. Everything in the two great Homeric poems, both in
substance and in language, belongs to an age two or three centuries
earlier than Peisistratus. Indeed, even the interpolations (or those
passages which, on the best grounds, are pronounced to be such) betray
no trace of the sixth century before Christ, and may well have been
heard by Archilochus and Kallinus—in some cases even by Arktinus and
Hesiod—as genuine Homeric matter.[29] As far as the evidences on the
case, as well internal as external, enable us to judge, we seem
warranted in believing that the Iliad and Odyssey were recited
substantially as they now stand (always allowing for partial
divergences of text and interpolations) in 776 B.C., our first
trustworthy mark of Grecian time; and this ancient date, let it be
added, as it is the best-authenticated fact, so it is also the most
important attribute of the Homeric poems, considered in reference to
Grecian history; for they thus afford us an insight into the
anti-historical character of the Greeks, enabling us to trace the
subsequent forward march of the nation, and to seize instructive
contrasts between their former and their later condition.”[30]

On the whole, I am inclined to believe, that the labours of
Peisistratus were wholly of an editorial character, although, I must
confess, that I can lay down nothing respecting the extent of his
labours. At the same time, so far from believing that the composition
or primary arrangement of these poems, in their present form, was the
work of Peisistratus, I am rather persuaded that the fine taste and
elegant mind of that Athenian[31] would lead him to preserve an ancient
and traditional order of the poems, rather than to patch and
re-construct them according to a fanciful hypothesis. I will not repeat
the many discussions respecting whether the poems were written or not,
or whether the art of writing was known in the time of their reputed
author. Suffice it to say, that the more we read, the less satisfied we
are upon either subject.

I cannot, however, help thinking, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version
of the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical
probability must be measured by that of many others relating to the
Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt,
made by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like
consistency. It is as follows:—

“No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common sailors
of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to ‘discourse in excellent
music’ among them. Many of these, like those of the negroes in the
United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to events passing
around them. But what was passing around them? The grand events of a
spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to impress themselves, as the
mystical legends of former times had done, upon their memory; besides
which, a retentive memory was deemed a virtue of the first water, and
was cultivated accordingly in those ancient times. Ballads at first,
and down to the beginning of the war with Troy, were merely
recitations, with an intonation. Then followed a species of recitative,
probably with an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the
memory considerably.

“It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war, that a
poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Mœonides, but most
probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be made of great
utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the social position of
Hellas, and, as a collection, he published these lays, connecting them
by a tale of his own. This poem now exists, under the title of the
‘Odyssea.’ The author, however, did not affix his own name to the poem,
which, in fact, was, great part of it, remodelled from the archaic
dialect of Crete, in which tongue the ballads were found by him. He
therefore called it the poem of Homeros, or the Collector; but this is
rather a proof of his modesty and talent, than of his mere drudging
arrangement of other people’s ideas; for, as Grote has finely observed,
arguing for the unity of authorship, ‘a great poet might have re-cast
pre-existing separate songs into one comprehensive whole; but no mere
arrangers or compilers would be competent to do so.’

“While employed on the wild legend of Odysseus, he met with a ballad,
recording the quarrel of Achilles and Agamemnon. His noble mind seized
the hint that there presented itself, and the Achilleïs[32] grew under
his hand. Unity of design, however, caused him to publish the poem
under the same pseudonyme as his former work: and the disjointed lays
of the ancient bards were joined together, like those relating to the
Cid, into a chronicle history, named the Iliad. Melesigenes knew that
the poem was destined to be a lasting one, and so it has proved; but,
first, the poems were destined to undergo many vicissitudes and
corruptions, by the people who took to singing them in the streets,
assemblies, and agoras. However, Solôn first, and then Peisistratus,
and afterwards Aristoteles and others, revised the poems, and restored
the works of Melesigenes Homeros to their original integrity in a great
measure.”[33]

Having thus given some general notion of the strange theories which
have developed themselves respecting this most interesting subject, I
must still express my conviction as to the unity of the authorship of
the Homeric poems. To deny that many corruptions and interpolations
disfigure them, and that the intrusive hand of the poetasters may here
and there have inflicted a wound more serious than the negligence of
the copyist, would be an absurd and captious assumption, but it is to a
higher criticism that we must appeal, if we would either understand or
enjoy these poems. In maintaining the authenticity and personality of
their one author, be he Homer or Melesigenes, _quocunque nomine vocari
eum jus fasque sit_, I feel conscious that, while the whole weight of
historical evidence is against the hypothesis which would assign these
great works to a plurality of authors, the most powerful internal
evidence, and that which springs from the deepest and most immediate
impulse of the soul, also speaks eloquently to the contrary.

The minutiæ of verbal criticism I am far from seeking to despise.
Indeed, considering the character of some of my own books, such an
attempt would be gross inconsistency. But, while I appreciate its
importance in a philological view, I am inclined to set little store on
its æsthetic value, especially in poetry. Three parts of the
emendations made upon poets are mere alterations, some of which, had
they been suggested to the author by his Mæcenas or Africanus, he
would probably have adopted. Moreover, those who are most exact in
laying down rules of verbal criticism and interpretation, are often
least competent to carry out their own precepts. Grammarians are not
poets by profession, but may be so _per accidens_. I do not at this
moment remember two emendations on Homer, calculated to substantially
improve the poetry of a passage, although a mass of remarks, from
Herodotus down to Loewe, have given us the history of a thousand minute
points, without which our Greek knowledge would be gloomy and jejune.

But it is not on words only that grammarians, mere grammarians, will
exercise their elaborate and often tiresome ingenuity. Binding down an
heroic or dramatic poet to the block upon which they have previously
dissected his words and sentences, they proceed to use the axe and the
pruning knife by wholesale, and inconsistent in everything but their
wish to make out a case of unlawful affiliation, they cut out book
after book, passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a
collection of fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed the
works of some great man, find that they have been put off with a vile
counterfeit got up at second hand. If we compare the theories of
Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and others, we shall feel better satisfied of
the utter uncertainty of criticism than of the apocryphal position of
Homer. One rejects what another considers the turning-point of his
theory. One cuts a supposed knot by expunging what another would
explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon
as a literary novelty. Justus Lipsius, a scholar of no ordinary skill,
seems to revel in the imaginary discovery, that the tragedies
attributed to Seneca are by _four_ different authors.[34] Now, I will
venture to assert, that these tragedies are so uniform, not only in
their borrowed phraseology—a phraseology with which writers like
Boethius and Saxo Grammaticus were more charmed than ourselves—in their
freedom from real poetry, and last, but not least, in an ultra-refined
and consistent abandonment of good taste, that few writers of the
present day would question the capabilities of the same gentleman, be
he Seneca or not, to produce not only these, but a great many more
equally bad. With equal sagacity, Father Hardouin astonished the world
with the startling announcement that the Æneid of Virgil, and the
satires of Horace, were literary deceptions. Now, without wishing to
say one word of disrespect against the industry and learning—nay, the
refined acuteness—which scholars, like Wolf, have bestowed upon this
subject, I must express my fears, that many of our modern Homeric
theories will become matter for the surprise and entertainment, rather
than the instruction, of posterity. Nor can I help thinking, that the
literary history of more recent times will account for many points of
difficulty in the transmission of the Iliad and Odyssey to a period so
remote from that of their first creation.

I have already expressed my belief that the labours of Peisistratus
were of a purely editorial character; and there seems no more reason
why corrupt and imperfect editions of Homer may not have been abroad in
his day, than that the poems of Valerius Flaccus and Tibullus should
have given so much trouble to Poggio, Scaliger, and others. But, after
all, the main fault in all the Homeric theories is, that they demand
too great a sacrifice of those feelings to which poetry most powerfully
appeals, and which are its most fitting judges. The ingenuity which has
sought to rob us of the name and existence of Homer, does too much
violence to that inward emotion, which makes our whole soul yearn with
love and admiration for the blind bard of Chios. To believe the author
of the Iliad a mere compiler, is to degrade the powers of human
invention; to elevate analytical judgment at the expense of the most
ennobling impulses of the soul; and to forget the ocean in the
contemplation of a polypus. There is a catholicity, so to speak, in the
very name of Homer. Our faith in the author of the Iliad may be a
mistaken one, but as yet nobody has taught us a better.

While, however, I look upon the belief in Homer as one that has nature
herself for its mainspring; while I can join with old Ennius in
believing in Homer as the ghost, who, like some patron saint, hovers
round the bed of the poet, and even bestows rare gifts from that wealth
of imagination which a host of imitators could not exhaust,—still I am
far from wishing to deny that the author of these great poems found a
rich fund of tradition, a well-stocked mythical storehouse from whence
he might derive both subject and embellishment. But it is one thing to
_use_ existing romances in the embellishment of a poem, another to
patch up the poem itself from such materials. What consistency of style
and execution can be hoped for from such an attempt? or, rather, what
bad taste and tedium will not be the infallible result?

A blending of popular legends, and a free use of the songs of other
bards, are features perfectly consistent with poetical originality. In
fact, the most original writer is still drawing upon outward
impressions—nay, even his own thoughts are a kind of secondary agents
which support and feed the impulses of imagination. But unless there be
some grand pervading principle—some invisible, yet most distinctly
stamped archetypus of the great whole, a poem like the Iliad can never
come to the birth. Traditions the most picturesque, episodes the most
pathetic, local associations teeming with the thoughts of gods and
great men, may crowd in one mighty vision, or reveal themselves in more
substantial forms to the mind of the poet; but, except the power to
create a grand whole, to which these shall be but as details and
embellishments, be present, we shall have nought but a scrap-book, a
parterre filled with flowers and weeds strangling each other in their
wild redundancy: we shall have a cento of rags and tatters, which will
require little acuteness to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware
as I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief,
it still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved
for a higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature
intended to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which
the greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were
faith no virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our
ignorance on any matter. But we are too well taught the contrary
lesson; and it seems as though our faith should be especially tried
touching the men and the events which have wrought most influence upon
the condition of humanity. And there is a kind of sacredness attached
to the memory of the great and the good, which seems to bid us repulse
the scepticism which would allegorize their existence into a pleasing
apologue, and measure the giants of intellect by an homeopathic
dynameter.

Long and habitual reading of Homer appears to familiarize our thoughts
even to his incongruities; or rather, if we read in a right spirit and
with a heartfelt appreciation, we are too much dazzled, too deeply
wrapped in admiration of the whole, to dwell upon the minute spots
which mere analysis can discover. In reading an heroic poem we must
transform ourselves into heroes of the time being, we in imagination
must fight over the same battles, woo the same loves, burn with the
same sense of injury, as an Achilles or a Hector. And if we can but
attain this degree of enthusiasm (and less enthusiasm will scarcely
suffice for the reading of Homer), we shall feel that the poems of
Homer are not only the work of one writer, but of the greatest writer
that ever touched the hearts of men by the power of song.

And it was this supposed unity of authorship which gave these poems
their powerful influence over the minds of the men of old. Heeren, who
is evidently little disposed in favour of modern theories, finely
observes:—

“It was Homer who formed the character of the Greek nation. No poet has
ever, as a poet, exercised a similar influence over his countrymen.
Prophets, lawgivers, and sages have formed the character of other
nations; it was reserved to a poet to form that of the Greeks. This is
a feature in their character which was not wholly erased even in the
period of their degeneracy. When lawgivers and sages appeared in
Greece, the work of the poet had already been accomplished; and they
paid homage to his superior genius. He held up before his nation the
mirror, in which they were to behold the world of gods and heroes no
less than of feeble mortals, and to behold them reflected with purity
and truth. His poems are founded on the first feeling of human nature;
on the love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured forth
from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of man; and
therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every breast which
cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to his immortal spirit,
from another heaven than any of which he dreamed on earth, to look down
on his race, to see the nations from the fields of Asia to the forests
of Hercynia, performing pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic
wand caused to flow; if it is permitted to him to view the vast
assemblage of grand, of elevated, of glorious productions, which had
been called into being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal
spirit may reside, this alone would suffice to complete his
happiness.”[35]

Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the “Apotheosis of
Homer”[36] is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing
association, how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to
our minds, is lost by the admittance of any theory but our old
tradition? The more we read, and the more we think—think as becomes the
readers of Homer,—the more rooted becomes the conviction that the
Father of Poetry gave us this rich inheritance, whole and entire.
Whatever were the means of its preservation, let us rather be thankful
for the treasury of taste and eloquence thus laid open to our use, than
seek to make it a mere centre around which to drive a series of
theories, whose wildness is only equalled by their inconsistency with
each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Pope’s translation, I will content myself with a brief
account of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer
who has done it full justice[37]:—

“This poem,” says Coleridge, “is a short mock-heroic of ancient date.
The text varies in different editions, and is obviously disturbed and
corrupt to a great degree; it is commonly said to have been a juvenile
essay of Homer’s genius; others have attributed it to the same Pigrees,
mentioned above, and whose reputation for humour seems to have invited
the appropriation of any piece of ancient wit, the author of which was
uncertain; so little did the Greeks, before the age of the Ptolemies,
know or care about that department of criticism employed in determining
the genuineness of ancient writings. As to this little poem being a
youthful profusion of Homer, it seems sufficient to say that from the
beginning to the end it is a plain and palpable parody, not only of the
general spirit, but of the numerous passages of the Iliad itself; and
even, if no such intention to parody were discernible in it, the
objection would still remain, that to suppose a work of mere burlesque
to be the primary effort of poetry in a simple age, seems to reverse
that order in the development of national taste, which the history of
every other people in Europe, and of many in Asia, has almost
ascertained to be a law of the human mind; it is in a state of society
much more refined and permanent than that described in the Iliad, that
any popularity would attend such a ridicule of war and the gods as is
contained in this poem; and the fact of there having existed three
other poems of the same kind attributed, for aught we can see, with as
much reason to Homer, is a strong inducement to believe that none of
them were of the Homeric age. Knight infers from the usage of the word
deltos, “writing tablet,” instead of διφθέρα, “skin,” which, according
to Herod. 5, 58, was the material employed by the Asiatic Greeks for
that purpose, that this poem was another offspring of Attic ingenuity;
and generally that the familiar mention of the cock (v. 191) is a
strong argument against so ancient a date for its composition.”

Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Pope’s
design, I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation,
and on my own purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby.
It is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his
whole work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes,
which prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical
attainments were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it
is probable that these examinations were the result rather of the
contradictory versions already existing, than of a desire to make a
perfect transcript of the original. And in those days, what is called
literal translation was less cultivated than at present. If something
like the general sense could be decorated with the easy gracefulness of
a practised poet; if the charms of metrical cadence and a pleasing
fluency could be made consistent with a fair interpretation of the
poet’s meaning, his _words_ were less jealously sought for, and those
who could read so good a poem as Pope’s Iliad had fair reason to be
satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope’s translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at
it as a most delightful work in itself,—a work which is as much a part
of English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn
from our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
ἀμφικύπελλον being an adjective, and not a substantive. Far be it from
us to defend the faults of Pope, especially when we think of Chapman’s
fine, bold, rough old English;—far be it from us to hold up his
translation as what a translation of Homer _might_ be. But we can still
dismiss Pope’s Iliad to the hands of our readers, with the
consciousness that they must have read a very great number of books
before they have read its fellow.

As to the Notes accompanying the present volume, they are drawn up
without pretension, and mainly with the view of helping the general
reader. Having some little time since translated all the works of Homer
for another publisher, I might have brought a large amount of
accumulated matter, sometimes of a critical character, to bear upon the
text. But Pope’s version was no field for such a display; and my
purpose was to touch briefly on antiquarian or mythological allusions,
to notice occasionally _some_ departures from the original, and to give
a few parallel passages from our English Homer, Milton. In the latter
task I cannot pretend to novelty, but I trust that my other
annotations, while utterly disclaiming high scholastic views, will be
found to convey as much as is wanted; at least, as far as the necessary
limits of these volumes could be expected to admit. To write a
commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I have made Pope’s
translation a little more entertaining and instructive to a mass of
miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily
accomplished.

THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.


_Christ Church_.




POPE’S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER


Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any
writer whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested
with him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular
excellences; but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it a
wonder if he has ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most
excelled in that which is the very foundation of poetry. It is the
invention that, in different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses:
the utmost stretch of human study, learning, and industry, which
masters everything besides, can never attain to this. It furnishes art
with all her materials, and without it judgment itself can at best but
“steal wisely:” for art is only like a prudent steward that lives on
managing the riches of nature. Whatever praises may be given to works
of judgment, there is not even a single beauty in them to which the
invention must not contribute: as in the most regular gardens, art can
only reduce beauties of nature to more regularity, and such a figure,
which the common eye may better take in, and is, therefore, more
entertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why common critics are
inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to a great and
fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves to pursue
their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art, than to
comprehend the vast and various extent of nature.

Our author’s work is a wild paradise, where, if we cannot see all the
beauties so distinctly as in an ordered garden, it is only because the
number of them is infinitely greater. It is like a copious nursery,
which contains the seeds and first productions of every kind, out of
which those who followed him have but selected some particular plants,
each according to his fancy, to cultivate and beautify. If some things
are too luxuriant it is owing to the richness of the soil; and if
others are not arrived to perfection or maturity, it is only because
they are overrun and oppressed by those of a stronger nature.

It is to the strength of this amazing invention we are to attribute
that unequalled fire and rapture which is so forcible in Homer, that no
man of a true poetical spirit is master of himself while he reads him.
What he writes is of the most animated nature imaginable; every thing
moves, every thing lives, and is put in action. If a council be called,
or a battle fought, you are not coldly informed of what was said or
done as from a third person; the reader is hurried out of himself by
the force of the poet’s imagination, and turns in one place to a
hearer, in another to a spectator. The course of his verses resembles
that of the army he describes,

    Οἵδ’ ἄῤ ἴσαν, ὡσεί τε πυρὶ χθὼν πἆσα νέμοιτο.

“They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it.” It
is, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous,
is not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its
fullest splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and
others, and becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity.
Exact disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers,
may have been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this “vivida
vis animi,” in a very few. Even in works where all those are imperfect
or neglected, this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even
while we disapprove. Nay, where this appears, though attended with
absurdities, it brightens all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing
but its own splendour. This fire is discerned in Virgil, but discerned
as through a glass, reflected from Homer, more shining than fierce, but
everywhere equal and constant: in Lucan and Statius it bursts out in
sudden, short, and interrupted flashes: In Milton it glows like a
furnace kept up to an uncommon ardour by the force of art: in
Shakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an accidental fire from
heaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns everywhere clearly and
everywhere irresistibly.

I shall here endeavour to show how this vast invention exerts itself in
a manner superior to that of any poet through all the main constituent
parts of his work: as it is the great and peculiar characteristic which
distinguishes him from all other authors.

This strong and ruling faculty was like a powerful star, which, in the
violence of its course, drew all things within its vortex. It seemed
not enough to have taken in the whole circle of arts, and the whole
compass of nature, to supply his maxims and reflections; all the inward
passions and affections of mankind, to furnish his characters: and all
the outward forms and images of things for his descriptions: but
wanting yet an ampler sphere to expatiate in, he opened a new and
boundless walk for his imagination, and created a world for himself in
the invention of fable. That which Aristotle calls “the soul of
poetry,” was first breathed into it by Homer. I shall begin with
considering him in his part, as it is naturally the first; and I speak
of it both as it means the design of a poem, and as it is taken for
fiction.


Fable may be divided into the probable, the allegorical, and the
marvellous. The probable fable is the recital of such actions as,
though they did not happen, yet might, in the common course of nature;
or of such as, though they did, became fables by the additional
episodes and manner of telling them. Of this sort is the main story of
an epic poem, “The return of Ulysses, the settlement of the Trojans in
Italy,” or the like. That of the Iliad is the “anger of Achilles,” the
most short and single subject that ever was chosen by any poet. Yet
this he has supplied with a vaster variety of incidents and events, and
crowded with a greater number of councils, speeches, battles, and
episodes of all kinds, than are to be found even in those poems whose
schemes are of the utmost latitude and irregularity. The action is
hurried on with the most vehement spirit, and its whole duration
employs not so much as fifty days. Virgil, for want of so warm a
genius, aided himself by taking in a more extensive subject, as well as
a greater length of time, and contracting the design of both Homer’s
poems into one, which is yet but a fourth part as large as his. The
other epic poets have used the same practice, but generally carried it
so far as to superinduce a multiplicity of fables, destroy the unity of
action, and lose their readers in an unreasonable length of time. Nor
is it only in the main design that they have been unable to add to his
invention, but they have followed him in every episode and part of
story. If he has given a regular catalogue of an army, they all draw up
their forces in the same order. If he has funeral games for Patroclus,
Virgil has the same for Anchises, and Statius (rather than omit them)
destroys the unity of his actions for those of Archemorus. If Ulysses
visit the shades, the Æneas of Virgil and Scipio of Silius are sent
after him. If he be detained from his return by the allurements of
Calypso, so is Æneas by Dido, and Rinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be
absent from the army on the score of a quarrel through half the poem,
Rinaldo must absent himself just as long on the like account. If he
gives his hero a suit of celestial armour, Virgil and Tasso make the
same present to theirs. Virgil has not only observed this close
imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the way, supplied the
want from other Greek authors. Thus the story of Sinon, and the taking
of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word from
Pisander, as the loves of Dido and Æneas are taken from those of Medea
and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.


To proceed to the allegorical fable—If we reflect upon those
innumerable knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy
which Homer is generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories,
what a new and ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us!
How fertile will that imagination appear, which was able to clothe all
the properties of elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues
and vices, in forms and persons, and to introduce them into actions
agreeable to the nature of the things they shadowed! This is a field in
which no succeeding poets could dispute with Homer, and whatever
commendations have been allowed them on this head, are by no means for
their invention in having enlarged his circle, but for their judgment
in having contracted it. For when the mode of learning changed in the
following ages, and science was delivered in a plainer manner, it then
became as reasonable in the more modern poets to lay it aside, as it
was in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was no unhappy
circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that demand
upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing all
those allegorical parts of a poem.


The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially
the machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the
deities (as Herodotus imagines) into the religion of Greece, he seems
the first who brought them into a system of machinery for poetry, and
such a one as makes its greatest importance and dignity: for we find
those authors who have been offended at the literal notion of the gods,
constantly laying their accusation against Homer as the chief support
of it. But whatever cause there might be to blame his machines in a
philosophical or religious view, they are so perfect in the poetic,
that mankind have been ever since contented to follow them: none have
been able to enlarge the sphere of poetry beyond the limits he has set:
every attempt of this nature has proved unsuccessful; and after all the
various changes of times and religions, his gods continue to this day
the gods of poetry.


We come now to the characters of his persons; and here we shall find no
author has ever drawn so many, with so visible and surprising a
variety, or given us such lively and affecting impressions of them.
Every one has something so singularly his own, that no painter could
have distinguished them more by their features, than the poet has by
their manners. Nothing can be more exact than the distinctions he has
observed in the different degrees of virtues and vices. The single
quality of courage is wonderfully diversified in the several characters
of the Iliad. That of Achilles is furious and intractable; that of
Diomede forward, yet listening to advice, and subject to command; that
of Ajax is heavy and self-confiding; of Hector, active and vigilant:
the courage of Agamemnon is inspirited by love of empire and ambition;
that of Menelaus mixed with softness and tenderness for his people: we
find in Idomeneus a plain direct soldier; in Sarpedon a gallant and
generous one. Nor is this judicious and astonishing diversity to be
found only in the principal quality which constitutes the main of each
character, but even in the under parts of it, to which he takes care to
give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main characters
of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct in this,
that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other natural,
open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage; and
this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference of
his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these
kinds. The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open
manner; they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and,
where they are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to
those of Homer. His characters of valour are much alike; even that of
Turnus seems no way peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and
we see nothing that differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of
Sergestus, Cloanthus, or the rest. In like manner it may be remarked of
Statius’s heroes, that an air of impetuosity runs through them all; the
same horrid and savage courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus,
Hippomedon, &c. They have a parity of character, which makes them seem
brothers of one family. I believe when the reader is led into this
tract of reflection, if he will pursue it through the epic and tragic
writers, he will be convinced how infinitely superior, in this point,
the invention of Homer was to that of all others.


The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the characters;
being perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the manners,
of those who utter them. As there is more variety of characters in the
Iliad, so there is of speeches, than in any other poem. “Everything in
it has manner” (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything is
acted or spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, how
small a number of lines are employed in narration. In Virgil the
dramatic part is less in proportion to the narrative, and the speeches
often consist of general reflections or thoughts, which might be
equally just in any person’s mouth upon the same occasion. As many of
his persons have no apparent characters, so many of his speeches escape
being applied and judged by the rule of propriety. We oftener think of
the author himself when we read Virgil, than when we are engaged in
Homer, all which are the effects of a colder invention, that interests
us less in the action described. Homer makes us hearers, and Virgil
leaves us readers.


If, in the next place, we take a view of the sentiments, the same
presiding faculty is eminent in the sublimity and spirit of his
thoughts. Longinus has given his opinion, that it was in this part
Homer principally excelled. What were alone sufficient to prove the
grandeur and excellence of his sentiments in general, is, that they
have so remarkable a parity with those of the Scripture. Duport, in his
Gnomologia Homerica, has collected innumerable instances of this sort.
And it is with justice an excellent modern writer allows, that if
Virgil has not so many thoughts that are low and vulgar, he has not so
many that are sublime and noble; and that the Roman author seldom rises
into very astonishing sentiments where he is not fired by the Iliad.


If we observe his descriptions, images, and similes, we shall find the
invention still predominant. To what else can we ascribe that vast
comprehension of images of every sort, where we see each circumstance
of art, and individual of nature, summoned together by the extent and
fecundity of his imagination to which all things, in their various
views presented themselves in an instant, and had their impressions
taken off to perfection at a heat? Nay, he not only gives us the full
prospects of things, but several unexpected peculiarities and side
views, unobserved by any painter but Homer. Nothing is so surprising as
the descriptions of his battles, which take up no less than half the
Iliad, and are supplied with so vast a variety of incidents, that no
one bears a likeness to another; such different kinds of deaths, that
no two heroes are wounded in the same manner, and such a profusion of
noble ideas, that every battle rises above the last in greatness,
horror, and confusion. It is certain there is not near that number of
images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every one has assisted
himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is evident of Virgil
especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are not drawn from
his master.


If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright
imagination of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We
acknowledge him the father of poetical diction; the first who taught
that “language of the gods” to men. His expression is like the
colouring of some great masters, which discovers itself to be laid on
boldly, and executed with rapidity. It is, indeed, the strongest and
most glowing imaginable, and touched with the greatest spirit.
Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who had found out
“living words;” there are in him more daring figures and metaphors than
in any good author whatever. An arrow is “impatient” to be on the wing,
a weapon “thirsts” to drink the blood of an enemy, and the like, yet
his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great in
proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the
same degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter,
as that is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass
in the furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a
greater clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the
heat more intense.


To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected
the compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper
to poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted
and filled the numbers with greater sound and pomp, and likewise
conduced in some measure to thicken the images. On this last
consideration I cannot but attribute these also to the fruitfulness of
his invention, since (as he has managed them) they are a sort of
supernumerary pictures of the persons or things to which they were
joined. We see the motion of Hector’s plumes in the epithet
Κορυθαίολος, the landscape of Mount Neritus in that of Εἰνοσίφυλλος,
and so of others, which particular images could not have been insisted
upon so long as to express them in a description (though but of a
single line) without diverting the reader too much from the principal
action or figure. As a metaphor is a short simile, one of these
epithets is a short description.


Lastly, if we consider his versification, we shall be sensible what a
share of praise is due to his invention in that also. He was not
satisfied with his language as he found it settled in any one part of
Greece, but searched through its different dialects with this
particular view, to beautify and perfect his numbers he considered
these as they had a greater mixture of vowels or consonants, and
accordingly employed them as the verse required either a greater
smoothness or strength. What he most affected was the Ionic, which has
a peculiar sweetness, from its never using contractions, and from its
custom of resolving the diphthongs into two syllables, so as to make
the words open themselves with a more spreading and sonorous fluency.
With this he mingled the Attic contractions, the broader Doric, and the
feebler Æolic, which often rejects its aspirate, or takes off its
accent, and completed this variety by altering some letters with the
licence of poetry. Thus his measures, instead of being fetters to his
sense, were always in readiness to run along with the warmth of his
rapture, and even to give a further representation of his notions, in
the correspondence of their sounds to what they signified. Out of all
these he has derived that harmony which makes us confess he had not
only the richest head, but the finest ear in the world. This is so
great a truth, that whoever will but consult the tune of his verses,
even without understanding them (with the same sort of diligence as we
daily see practised in the case of Italian operas), will find more
sweetness, variety, and majesty of sound, than in any other language of
poetry.